Konpass #1.2.10
By Konamiman, 2022

Based on Compass 1.2.09
(c)1998 Compjoetania The Next Generation

MSX, MSX-DOS and R800 are trademarks of ASCII Corp.
Z80 is a trademark of ZILOG Corp.
MemMan is developed by the Msx Software Team

Despite all the care taken by the production of this text, the author 
can not be held responsible for any possible damage resulting from errors 
contained in this document.


Preface
-------

In October 2021 Compass, originally a paid product, was published for free 
including its source code. I've been a huge fan of Compass since version 1.0 
was published in 1995, and it's my main tool when I'm developing 
(or debugging) directly on my MSX.

In the more than 20 years that have passed since the last version, 
Compass 1.2.09, was published, I've had plenty of time to notice some small 
quirks/bugs/annoyances on it. And with the source code available for everyone 
I couldn't resist to put my hands on it and implement all the fixes and 
improvements I always wanted to see in Compass, and the result was 
Konpass 1.2.10, a refresh of the good old product. No more, no less.

I hope that I have made Konpass an even better assembler IDE for MSX. Please 
feel free to suggest further improvements (or even submit pull requests!) in 
the Konpass repository I have created (address in section 1.1).

January 2022, Konamiman


Original preface for Compass 1.2.09
-----------------------------------

Why another MSX-Assembler? In the dark past many different assemblers were 
produced for the MSX-system in addition to the already available CP/M 
assemblers. Along with the advantages of these products, there were also a 
lot of disadvantages.

Some of them had an integrated environment but weren't able of handling large 
sources, others were very powerful but needed a separated editor causing a 
waste of time when testing and debugging. Most of these programs didn't take 
advantage of the new developments in the MSX-scene. Just to name a few of 
them: Turbo R (the R800 instruction set), MemMan, DOS 2.xx (subdirectories).
There just wasn't an assembler which combined enough advantages to satisfy 
almost everyone.

Compass is our attempt to create an easy-to-use, menu driven and extensive 
package specifically designed for the MSX-system. The name "Compass" is an 
contraption of the words "COMPjoetania ASSembler". We would like to thank 
everybody who, one way or another, has contributed to the development of 
Compass.

We hope you enjoy Compass.

September 1998, Compjoetania The Next Generation

Original concept and program by Compjoetania (1995):
*Remo Jongeneelen
*David Heremans
*Eric van Beurden

Compass #1.2 by Compjoetania The Next Generation (1997...)
*Jon De Schrijder: coding
*David Heremans  : manual, disklabels
*Wouter Vermaelen: bughunter, did a great job


1. Preparations
---------------

It is important that you read this chapter before you proceed. It contains 
important information about the program as a whole and the contents of the 
package.


1.1 Getting Konpass

The latest version of Konpass is available in its GitHub repository:

https://github.com/Konamiman/Konpass

This is also the place to report bugs and suggest improvements. Please note 
that Konpass is now a hobbyist project, so bugs/suggestions will be 
looked at whenever the author has some spare time (but you can always submit 
pull requests yourself, of course!)

And this is the repository for Compass 1.2.09, in whose sources Konpass 
1.2.10 and later versions is based:

https://github.com/turbor/compass-1.2-sources

See the version of this same file in that repository if you are curious about 
what were the contact details and the available service options for the 
original product.


1.2 Contents of the release

The Konpass release consists of the following files:

   * The program Konpass:
     KONPASS.COM
     KONPASS.DAT
   * This manual in TXT format
     C12MANUA.TXT
   * Konpass version history list
     COMPASSV.TXT

Note: once "Save configuration" is executed, and extra KONPASS.CFG file
will be created. See chapter 10.

Originally Compass was distributed on a floppy disk that contained additional 
tools and technical information. If you are interested in those, please 
visit the GitHub repository for Compass 1.2.09 (see section 1.1).


1.3 Configuration

Konpass runs on every MSX2, MSX2+ and MSX Turbo R computer with a memory 
mapper of at least 128KB Ram, though for convenient use, we recommend a 
memory capacity of at least 256KB. 'Fixed' rammodules (this is: not 
mapped ram) are not supported. (And you'll need a double-sided disk drive 
for the original floppy disk to work of course.)

Konpass supports the following configurations :

* MSX-DOS 2.xx: If you have DOS 2.xx you are able to browse through
  subdirectories and you can take advantage of the DOS 2.xx Ramdisk.
* MEMORY MAPPER: Konpass supports multiple memory mappers.
* MSX TURBO-R:  If you run Konpass on an MSX Turbo R you are able to switch
  between the Z80 and R800 (ROM/DRAM) processor.
* HARDDISK: You are able to install Konpass on your harddisk, just place
  the KONPASS.COM and KONPASS.DAT files in the same directory.
* MemMan 2.42: Konpass uses -if already installed- the memory management
  routines provided by MemMan. This allows you to use TSR's while
  you are using Konpass. If you don't use MemMan then Konpass will use the
  routines provided by DOS 2.xx . If you don't use either of them, Konpass will
  resort to its own memory routines. You can find MemMan 2.42 and the
  accompanying programs in a packed archive on the disk.
* Nextor: If you run Nextor you have a couple of extra perks. Currently these 
  are: the ability to read and write sectors on any drive regardless of the 
  filesystem it contains, and seeing the real free disk space in drives with 
  a capacity of more than 32MB.

Konpass uses screen 0 in 80 columns mode. This mode is slightly altered to
display 26.5 lines and 4 colors. The assembler in Konpass also uses some Vram,
but this amount will never exceed the address space from #00000 up to #07FFF.


1.4 Booting Konpass

The version of Konpass that you'll find on the disk is a COM file which has 
to be launched using MSX-DOS or Nextor. The two files that make up MSX-DOS are:

* MSXDOS.SYS and COMMAND.COM for MSX-DOS 1.xx
* MSXDOS2.SYS and COMMAND2.COM for MSX-DOS 2.xx
* NEXTOR.SYS (or MSXDOS2.SYS) and COMMAND2.COM for Nextor

These files are available in the original repository for Compass 1.2.09 (see 
section 1.1). You can copy the files KONPASS.COM and KONPASS.DAT to a disk 
containing these MSX-DOS files, or just launch MSX-DOS and swap the disks. 
Alternatively you can copy the Konpass files to a directory on your hard disk. 
When you have started MSX-DOS just type :

        A>KONPASS [RETURN]

Konpass will first perform some hardware checks on your computer. 
If your computer crashes here, then there is something wrong with your 
hardware. (For example: random memory errors when working on a 7MHz MSX2. 
These hardware problems are very difficult to trace.) If everything went 
fine, you'll see the amount of mapped memory Konpass has detected. 
Also what kind of memory management that will be used. Konpass can 
run in four memory management conditions:

* DOS1: no memory management, Konpass will use its own routines.
* DOS1+MemMan: MemMan will take care of Konpass memory management. Due to some 
  unknown problems (probably MemMan) this setting will cause the computer to 
  crash. So we do not recommend to use MemMan in DOS1 environment.
* DOS1 + mapper support routines: if mapper support routines are installed 
  in DOS1 Konpass will use these as if it was running in DOS2.
  The mapper support routines can be installed in DOS1 using the MSR.COM tool 
  available at Konamiman's MSX page (http://www.konamiman.com).
* DOS2: memory management performed by the DOS2 mapper support routines.
* DOS2+MemMan: memory management performed by MemMan.

If you use MemMan, we recommend to use the latest version of MemMan, version 
2.42.

If it is the first time you start Konpass, the program will search for 
available memory. Konpass needs at least five free pages of mapperram. And 
two of them should be situated in the Primary Mapper. Four of them may not be 
segments in the TPA because the Compas sprogram data will be stored there.
If one of these conditions is not met, the installation of Konpass will 
abort, otherwise the program will allocate a maximum of 1536kB and make this 
memory unreachable for other programs. Of course if you don't use any 
memory manager, this memory is not unreachable for other programs and your 
Konpass program and/or data may be overwritten by these programs.
Konpass will preferably allocate memory in other mappers than the Primary 
Mapper. This might help to prevent the previous problem, although this will 
make the program somewhat slower.

In some cases it can be useful not to use all available memory. You can limit 
the memory allocation of Konpass by pressing the SHIFT key when you start 
Konpass. Currently this limitation is set to 9 segments. In future versions 
of Konpass this number will be changeable.

If you have performed a 'Main config' (see chapter 10) Konpass will try to 
reinstall your saved memory configuration. If all used segments in this 
memory configuration are not free, or when the Primary Mapper slot has changed 
(for example: when you've placed an extra memory mapper into your MSX), 
Konpass will try to allocate segments described as above.

Finally the Konpass program is loaded from (hard)disk and is launched. On 
fast MSX systems startupmessages may disappear too fast. Hold down STOP 
during loading if you want to pause these messages. Press this key again 
to continue.

It is also possible to load an assemblerfile (ASM) from the command line. 
Example:

        A>KONPASS KY.ASM

The file KY.ASM will be loaded when Konpass is launched.

Note:

Konpass frequently uses Kbuf (#F41F: 318 bytes long). Make sure this part of 
your memory is free and that your programs and/or TSRs don't affect this 
memory. The printer buffer PB.TSR for instance can't be used because of this.
Also some Konpass code is stored in PLAYq ueues for channel B and C. 
(#F9F5-#FAF4). Make sure these queues are not overwritten by other programs 
or by executing a PLAY statement in BASIC for channel B or C.


2. General
----------

2.1 General screen layout

All parts of Konpass use a common screen layout to have a general look and 
feel throughout the entire program.

* Status bar:

The upperline of the screen always contains the status bar. On the left of 
this bar you will find the name Konpass followed by the main version number. 
This number will change when a new mainversion is distributed. 
(The complete version number can be obtained by displaying the KONPASS.COM or 
KONPASS.DAT file in some textviewer, or in the "About" menu.)

On the right side the announcement '2022 Konamiman'. Between these two 
messages you'll find the name of the currently selected program part of 
Konpass.

* The empty line:

It's just here for ease of survey. Don't expect any messages here.

* Menu bar:

This menu bar is situated below the empty line. This bar will display the 
available menus of the currently active program part. It can contain a maximum 
of five menus. These can be reached using the function keys [F1] up to [F5].

* Desktop:

This occupies most of the screen. Here the real action takes place.

* Function bar:

Below the desktop you'll find a status bar. This bar is only present in the 
assembler and contains important information about the current source and 
settings. In the other parts of Konpass this function bar is suppressed and 
the extra lines are used to extend the desktop.


2.2 Controls

Almost all functions in Konpass can be selected by means of the keyboard, the 
mouse or the so-called shortcuts.

The menu bar contains the menus which can be activated using the function 
keys or second mouse button (if mouse support is activated). When a menu is 
activated a dropdown list will appear. You can select another menu by 
clicking the appropriate function key or by using the cursor left and cursor 
right keys to gain access to the other menus. Use the cursor keys up and down 
to selected an item in the menu. 

Your current choice will be indicated in a bar that uses the alternative 
colors. Use the space bar to activate a choice. Pressing [ESC] will leave the 
menus and bring you back in the active program part.

For your convenience a standard order is used throughout all parts of Konpass. 
The function key [F1] will always activate the SYSTEM menu (see chapter 2.3) 
and the second menu (use [F2]) will always be the CONFIGURATION menu. The 
contents of these menus will of course be slightly altered depending on the 
active part when the menu was summoned. The menus hidden under [F3] up to [F5] 
are different for each part and may even be absent.

* Mouse control

A great effort has gone into enabling mouse support for Konpass. A lot of 
options can be reached using the mouse without the need for keyboard 
interaction. Of course a lot of actions, like searching, need keyboard input, 
but a lot can be done without it.

If you're on the desktop you can use the right mouse button to reactivate the 
last used menu. Use the left button to activate an item. The mouse can now be 
used to walk through all options and menus. Instead of pressing [ESC] you can 
use the right mousebutton in most of the cases. To move around with the 
cursor on the desktop, you should hold down the left mouse button.

Remark: mouse control is disabled by default (see 'Main Install' in
chapter 10).

* Shortcuts

Shortcuts are key combinations which allow you to reach certain options in a 
very fast way without using the regular menu selection which can be time 
consuming if used a lot. In Konpass a shortcut consists in most of the cases 
of the [CTRL] key combined with another key. All the shortcuts are listed 
in appendix A. Most shortcuts are mentioned after the option in the menu. For 
example: in the SYSTEM menu the disk option will be followed by ^D indicating 
that [CTRL] and [D] pressed together is the shortcut for the diskmenu.

Another easy shortcut to use is the [STOP] key which switches you from one 
program part to another one. This in the order: assembler, monitor, debugger, 
assembler, monitor, ... etc.


2.3 System menu

This menu can always be reached by pressing [F1]. This menu differs very 
slightly from program part to program part. The options of this menu are listed 
below accompanied by the chapter number which deals with the topic.

        Assembler   chapter 3
        Monitor     chapter 4
        Debugger    chapter 5
        Disk        chapter 6
        Memory      chapter 7
        Calculator  chapter 8
        Slotview    chapter 9
        Shell       see below
        Quit        see below
        About       Display information about Konpass

The options SHELL and QUIT are closely related. The shortcut for SHELL is 
[SHIFT]+[ESC]. The shortcut for QUIT is [CTRL]+[Q].

With SHELL you can leave the Konpass program and go back to the shell from 
where you've last activated Konpass. You can return to Konpass by typing CMD 
KONPASS [RETURN] from the MSX-BASIC prompt, by pressing [SHIFT]+[ESC] (DOS 
and MSX-BASIC), and by running KONPASS.COM again.

If you return to Konpass, all settings are still preserved and if everything 
went well you can just continue where you left. Neverthelesss certain 
precautions should to be taken. When using DOS2 and/or MemMan the memory 
blocks used by Konpass are reserved by these respective memory managers. 
So if all other programs, started during this 'shell', use these 
memory managers, there is no problem.

If you use a program that does its own memory management, then you can easily 
destroy the data used by Konpass. If this happens your source can be destroyed 
or Konpass can be become unstable. A simple trick that most of the time works, 
is placing all the important memory blocks (sources) in the highly numbered 
blocks and the less important (label buffers) in the lower memory blocks.

QUIT will terminate the Konpass program completely. All used memory will be 
freed and you will return to the last activated shell. Make sure you save your 
work before quitting! Otherwise there is no way to recover it.


3. Assembler
------------

After you have chosen the option ASSEMBLER from the SYSTEM menu you will end 
up in the editor. The assembler consists of a very extensive editor and the 
actual assembler.

Programming machine language directly in processor comprehensible byte code is 
a very tedious job. When one instruction is inserted, all absolute addresses 
in the code have to be recalculated and to do this yourself isn't very 
enjoyable.

Besides, these instructions are made up of numbers, which aren't as easy to 
remember as carefully chosen abreviations. The combination of these 
(hexadecimal) numbers are called opcodes. For each opcode an easy to remember 
word/sentence was standardized. These words are called mnemonics. Each 
mnemonic represents an opcode and vice versa. The editor is used to write a 
program with these mnemonics. The machine language written in mnemonics is 
called an assembler source.

When this source is assembled it is translated into machine code instructions. 
Each time you change something in the source, the source should be reassembled 
before you can run the new program because all used addresses will probably 
need recalculation.

* Labels

Most powerful feature of an assembler is the use of labels. These labels can 
be used for different purposes and they help to make the sources more 
comprehensible. They are mostly used to give constants a name and to help 
calculating addresses when assembling. The length of these labels in Konpass 
can vary between 6 and 20 characters. The following characters are allowed in 
a label name:

ABCDEFGHIJKLMNOPQRSTUVWXYZ
abcdefghijklmnopqrstuvwxyz
0123456789_-!?

There are a few restrictions. A label may not start with a digit. Neither 
reserved words may be used as a label. An overview of these reserved words 
can be found in Appendix C.

Programmers are used to place a colon behind a label when this label is 
declared, but there is no need to do this in Konpass. If a label ends with two 
colons then this label is declared public (see chapter 14).


3.1 Assembler screen and controls

The assembler screen is made up of a status bar, a menubar, the desktop and a 
function bar. The menubar has five different menus, respectively the SYSTEM 
menu, the CONFIGURATION menu, the OPTIONS menu, the ASSEMBLE menu and finally 
the BLOCK menu. The desktop can be found below the menubar, which is an text 
editor containing the sources. The functionbar can be found at the bottom of 
the screen, displaying the linenumbers, INSert on/off, buffer used by BLOCK 
and the number of the current source buffer.

The editor supports the mouse and most of the functions can be activated 
using shortcuts. For a list of these shortcuts refer to appendix A. Of 
course the regular keys like [BS], [DEL], [TAB] etc. work like one expects 
them to do.

Pressing [GRAPH]+cursorkeys can be used to change casing state of letters.

The editor is line oriented. The line is stored in memory by pressing [RET] 
and is displayed according to some simple guidelines.

If AUTO ALIGN is turned on:

Labels are placed at the left margin, the instruction is placed at the first 
tab position and instructionparameters are placed at the second and third 
tabpositions. All characters behind a semi-colon are ignored and are 
positioned behind the last used tab position. This is used to enter remarks 
about your program. The cursor is placed at the first tabposition on the next 
line. An empty line is inserted if the RET INSERT is on.

If AUTO ALIGN is turned off:

No repositioning of the entered text will take place, the cursor will be 
placed at the beginning of the next line. This is useful to edit/load normal 
text documents.


3.2 The assembler menus

The menubar of the assembler consists of five menus:

        System:        see chapter 2.3
        Configuration: see chapter 3.2.1
        Options:       see chapter 3.2.2
        Assemble:      see chapter 3.2.3
        Block:         see chapter 3.2.4

Most of these options can be reached by using the shortcuts, see Apendix A.


3.2.1 Configuration menu

Some assembler settings can be modified in this menu, which you can reach by 
pressing [F2].

* SOURCEBUFFER:

Use this option to switch between the different available source buffers. 
Konpass can use a maximum of four source buffers, each containig a maximum of 
256 KB of text. This allows you to work with four sources at the same time! 
Or  you can use some source buffers to hold a text with technical reference 
material etc. The number and size of the source buffers can be controlled 
using the MEMORY option in the SYSTEM menu. In the right lower corner of the 
screen the currently active buffernumber is displayed.

* CPU:

If you're running Konpass on a Turbo-R you can use this option to choose the 
desired CPU mode: Z80-mode, R800 ROM mode and R800 DRAM mode. There isn't any 
difference in speed between the R800 ROM and R800 DRAM mode since Konpass 
doesn't use bios calls. Therefore we suggest to choose for the R800 ROM mode 
since the DRAM mode uses 64kB of memory.

Note: on a MSX2 this will always display Z80 and no other selections are 
available of course.

* LABEL LENGTH:

The length of the labels can vary from 6 to 20 characters. Use cursor keys to 
alter the value when this option is chosen. Use [ESC] to cancel. See also the 
assembler directive .LABEL (chapter 3.3.3)

* RET INSERT:

When this option is turned on, a new blank line will be inserted automatically 
each time [RET] is pressed. If the cursor is at the end of a line, an empty line 
is inserted after the current line. Otherwise the empty line is inserted before 
the current line. In both cases the cursor is placed at the new line.

* AUTO ALIGN:

Turn this option off if you want to read and handle non-source ASCII files. 
For more information see chapter 3.1.

* UPPER CASE:

This makes the assembler case sensitive if turned off. This only affects 
label- and macron ames. Notice: no effects are visible in the editor.
If this is turned off, labels like Print (some printing routine) and prInt 
(initialize the printer) are completely different labels. Be aware of the fact 
that using this kind of labels can be very confusing later on, when you have 
to re-read some old code or someone else has to maintain your code.

* MAIN INSTALL:

This affects the general setting for Konpass. For more info see chapter 10.


3.2.2 Options menu

In this menu, accessible using [F3] you'll find some options that are very 
useful when editing a source.

* SHOW ERRORS:

If during assembling errors are encountered all these errors are placed in a 
single error list. This option displays the errorlist and enables you to select 
an error. When you press [SPACE] the editor will be placed on the line number 
containing the error.

If the line number doesn't exist anymore a beep will be heard and the error 
list will stay activated. The error list stays in memory until you assemble 
the source again, start the program or do some disk operations.

If you press [ESC] you go back to the editor, when needed you can return to 
the error list as often as you want. When inserting and removing lines in the 
editor, the line numbers in the error list will be adjusted automatically. You 
can find an overview of all the possible errors and their meaning in Appendix 
B.

* SHOW LABELS:

When you assemble a source all the label names and their values will be 
placed in the label list. When displaying this list using the SHOW LABELS 
option, all labels will be displayed in alphabetical sequence. Use the 
cursor keys to scroll through the labels. If you press [SPACE] you will jump 
to to linenumber where the label is defined.

* SEARCH/REPLACE:

Use this to search for certain words and if necessary to replace them by other 
words. [CTRL] + [Z] is the most easy way to reach this option. When activated 
you will be asked for the string to search for. This field will contain the 
value of the previous search.

When [ENTER] is pressed you can, if needed, type the replacement string. Leave 
this field empty if no replacement is needed. Searching forward or backward is 
possible. Case sensitivity can be altered. When the search is started there 
are two possibilities. If the string is found then the cursor will go to the 
line where the string is found. Otherwise the error message "String not 
found!" will appear. Use SEARCH NEXT to find the next occurrence of the 
string.

* SEARCH NEXT:

If you didn't get an error message you can start a new search/replace for the 
same string. The shortcut is [CTRL] + [N].

* JUMP TO LINE:

Allows you to jump to a given line. After selecting this option a window will 
appear, allowing you to enter the line number. When [RET] is pressed the 
cursor is immediately placed on this line. The cursor will be placed on the 
last line of the source if the linenumber doesn't exist.

* DELETE SOURCE:

This removes the source in the current source buffer. This option will ask 
for confirmation. After you have confirmed the source will be gone and there 
will be no way to recover it! So make sure you have saved the source if you 
think that you'll need it again!


3.2.3 Assemble menu

You'll find everything you need to assemble your source in this menu, 
accessible using [F4]. 

* ASSEMBLE:

Activate this to assemble the source in the current source buffer. Assembling 
in Konpass is a so-called two-pass-assembling. First the entire source is 
evaluated to find the values of all the labels and in a second pass the source 
is assembled to memory.

Errors will be shown after the first, respectively second, pass. If an error 
is found in the first pass, the assembler will not start the second pass. Use 
the ERROR menu to locate the errors in the source, see chapter 3.2.2 and 
Appendix B. If all went well the begin and end address will be shown.

* ASSEMBLE TO DISK:

Where the first option assembles to memory, with the possibility to change the 
destination on the fly with the ORG directive, this option just writes the 
bytes generated during assembling sequentially to a file. You can choose where 
and with which name the source has to be assembled. The option save and load 
are replaced by assemble. Use this option to start the actual assembling.
Assembling directly to disk enables you to write programs that are able to 
reallocate themselves on execution. For example:

start   equ     #8000
        org     #0100
        ld      hl,program ;move program
        ld      de,start
        ld      bc,programend-start
        ldir
        jp      start
program
        org     start
...     ;reallocateable program comes here
programend

* ASSEMBLE TO TSR:

Assemble your source directly to a Terminate and Stay Resident program, to be 
used with MemMan.

In this case assembling will take place in three passes. The actual code will 
be written to disk during the third pass. For more info on TSR's we suggest 
that you get a copy of the TSR development kit of MST. See chapter 13 for more 
info on the .TSRHOOKS directive, needed for assembling a TSR.

* ASSEMBLE TO RELOCATEABLE:

This will compile the code into a relocateable file format. This file format 
can be placed anywhere in memory or glued together with other programs using 
a linker.

This can be very useful if you have a greater project. You can split your 
source in different small modules. If you make a modification to one of these 
modules, only this small module has to be reassembled instead of the entire 
source.

For the moment it is still necessary to use an external linker program.

NOTE: when the disk menu is entered via "Assemble to disk/TSR/REL", 
the keyboard shortcut [CTRL] + [X] is available to trigger the assembly 
process as if the "Assemble" option had been selected.

* REGISTERS:

This option is used to alter the registers of the Z80/R800 before you use the 
GO option to execute a program. The contents of the registers when the program 
is finished are also stored so that you can use this option to examine to 
values after excution.

For more info on how to change the values, see the chapter about the 
disassembler; this window uses the same techniques as discussed there. For a 
more thorough examination of the code as it is processed by the MSX, you 
would be better off with the debugger itself.

* GO:

Use this to execute a program somewhere in memory. It uses the 
register/interrupt settings as set with the REGISTERS menu. When activated 
you will be asked for an address to 'call to'. Before the code is actually 
executed the screen is placed in regular 24 line screen 0 mode and cleared.
When the program returns Konpass will reinitialize the VDP in 'Konpass mode'. 
Be aware: your MSX may crash if the program to run is not stable! So make sure 
you have saved the source before trying this option!


3.2.4 Block menu

You'll find all available block functions of the editor in this menu, 
reachable by pressing F5. You can select only one block in one of the four 
source buffers at the same time. Whether a block is selected or not is 
displayed at the function bar: the number of the source buffer in which the 
block is selected is displayed here.

You can recognize a selected block by its coloured borders: the first and last 
position on these selected lines will have the colour of the menu bar.

* START BLOCK:

To select a desired block, you'll need to mark the begin and the end of the 
block. Use this option to mark the begin when you're on the desired line. 

* END BLOCK:

Use this option to mark the end when you're on the desired line.

* REMOVE BLOCK:

Use this option to deselect a selected block. The text itself is not removed, 
only the begin and end marks!

* COPY BLOCK:

You can copy the selected block with this option to the line you're on. The 
original block is not removed. Of course you can't copy a block to somewhere 
in the selected block. You can also copy between different source buffers 
with this option. You can copy the selected block as many times as your amount 
of memory will allow you.

* MOVE BLOCK:

You can move the selected block with this option to the line you're on. The 
original block is deleted. Of course you can't move a block to somewhere in 
the selected block. You can also move text between different source buffers 
with this option. 

* DELETE BLOCK:

Use this option to delete the selected block. Be careful, because a deleted 
block can't be restored!

* PRINT BLOCK:

The selected block will be sent to the printer. If your printer is not ready, 
an error message will appear.

* COPY LABEL:

To use this option you should have selected a block beginning with a label. If 
you activate this option the label will be copied to the cursor's current 
position.


3.3 Special commands

The Konpass assembler contains a lot of extra commands for several purposes:


3.3.1 Exceptions

In addition to all standard Zilog/Mostek mnemonics some other mnemonics are 
allowed:

PUSH reg1,reg2,reg3,... ;this is assembled as separate PUSH instructions
POP reg1,reg2,reg3,...  ;this is assembled as separate POP instructions

EX AF,AF  ;this is supported because of compatibility with other assemblers
EX AF,AF' ;standard Zilog mnemonic

LD A,""    ;the same as LD A,0
LD HL,"KL" ;the same as LD HL,#4B4C

LD B ;the same as LD A,B This works for all mnemonics with register A

DJNZ $-2 ;dollarsign is equal to the current address

LD A,%11 01 11 10 ;spaces are allowed between binary digits

The following is not allowed:

LD A,"""  ;this should be done with LD A,'"'
LD A,char ;only character with an ASCII code below 128 are allowed


3.3.2 The R800 processor

A Turbo-R is equipped with a R800 processor in addition to the Z80. Almost all 
mnemonics on this R800 were renamed, but the opcodes have remained. Konpass 
only recognizes the old Z80 mnemonics, but does recognize the new mnemonics of 
the new instructions. You're allowed to use these new instructions on MSX2, 
but they won't work on Z80.

There are four new 8-bit instructions for multiplication. HL contains the 
16bit result:

MULUB A,B ;opcode: ED C1
MULUB A,C ;opcode: ED CD
MULUB A,D ;opcode: ED D5
MULUB A,E ;opcode: ED DD

There are two new 16-bit instructions for multiplication. DE-HL contains the 
32bit result:

MULUW HL,BC ;opcode: ED C3
MULUW HL,SP ;opcode: ED F3

There is a new instruction to read a port to the flags register. Only S and Z 
are set according to the incoming data. H, N and P/V are reset.

IN F,(C) ;opcode: ED 70

Using half index registers on R800 is possible. These instructions were also 
available on Z80, but not officially. They are called IXh, IXl, IYh, IYl.


3.3.3 Assembler directives

These are special commands needed for correct assembling, also called 
pseudo-instructions.

        ORG
        Syntax: ORG address

With ORG you can select on which address the program must be compiled. That's 
why you have to put in at the beginning of a program. If no ORG directive is 
used, the program will be assembled at address #0100.

        EQU (equals)
        Syntax: label EQU value

Use this to define your constants.
Example: CHGET EQU #009F

        END (End of assembly)
        Syntax: END

Use this directive to indicate that assembling must be terminated here. 
There's no need to put this directives at the end of your source. It's only 
useful to stop assembling somewhere in the middle of source, for instance 
when not all labels are defined yet and you want to compile the first part of 
your source.

        DEFB / DB (Define Byte)
        Syntax: DB value,value,text,...

Use this directive to poke some 8bit values or text in your code.
Example: DB "This is great!",0

You can use numerical operations on the last character in a string:
Example: DB "This too!"+128  ;bit 7 of the last character (!) is set

        DEFM / DM

Is exactly the same as DB. This directive was built in for compatibily.

        DEFC / DC
        Syntax: DEFC string

Is the same as DB, but bit 7 of the last character in the string is set. 
Useful to recognize the end of a textfield in memory.
Example: DC "Hallo"   ;bit 7 of the 'o' is set

Also numerical operations on the last character are allowed.
Example: DC "TNI"-2   ;same as "TNG" with bit 7 of G set.

        DEFS / DS (Define Storage)
        Syntax: DS number of bytes [,byte to fill with]

With this directive you can create empty memory areas in your program. Useful 
for buffers, etc. If the 'byte to fill with' is omitted, the area will be 
filled with zero.
Example: DS 100,"C"       ;area with 100 bytes "C"
         DS 4*20,13       ;area with 80 bytes #0D

        DEFW / DW (Define Word)
        Syntax: DW 16bitvalue,16bitvalue,...

Same as DB, but DW puts 16bit values in your code.
Example: DW #babe,label,20*5

        TSRHOOKS
        Syntax: TSRHOOKS

You'll need to put this directive in front of the hooks used by your TSR (at 
the end of your TSR). For more info, see chapter 13.

        .LABEL
        Syntax: .LABEL length

You can tell the assembler how long the used labels can be in your source. So 
you won't need to change this setting in the CONFIGURATION menu when you work 
with several label lenghts. Of course this directive has to be placed at the 
beginning of your source.

        .UPPER
        Syntax: .UPPER on/off

You can tell the assembler whether all text should be uppercased or not before 
assembling starts. So you won't need to change this setting in the 
CONFIGURATION menu when you work with several types of casing. Remark: your 
source itself will not change to uppercased characters.

        BREAKP
        Syntax: BREAKP

If the assembler encounters this directive, the current address will be parsed 
to the Debugger's breakpointtable. Easy to debug your own source. Remark: Your 
previous breakpoint settings will be erased.

        INCLUDE
        Syntax: INCLUDE buffer[,filename]

This directive gives you the possibility to add external sources to your 
current source. This other source should be in source buffer 'buffer'. If you 
also enter a filename, the source will be loaded first in source buffer 
'buffer'.

        MACRO / ENDM / DEFL

These directives are necessary for working with macros. See chapter 11.

        IF / COND /ELSE / ENDIF / ENDC

These directives are necessary for working with conditional assembly. See 
chapter 12.

        CSEG / DSEG / ASEG / PUBLIC / EXTRN / .PHASE / .DEPHASE

These directives are necessary for working with Relocateable files. See 
chapter 14.

  
4. Monitor
----------

After you have chosen the option Monitor from the system menu you will be 
faced with a new screen layout indicating that you have entered the monitor.
This monitor is completely real-time, meaning that the information on screen 
is updated constantly to reflected possible changes in the memory as they 
occur. Since this enables you to keep track of which bytes are changed in 
memory this is a perfect way to get an understanding/insight of what a program 
does or why a certain error occurs in your program.


4.1 Monitor screen and controls

The monitor screens is made up by a status bar, a menu bar and the desktop. 
The menu bar has three different menus, respectively the SYSTEM menu, the 
CONFIGURATION menu and finally the OPTIONS menu. Below the menu bar the 
desktop can be found, which consist of, on the left side a hexadecimal dump 
and on the right side, an ASCII dump.

The monitor supports the mouse and most of the functions can be activated 
using shortcuts. For a list of the shortcuts refer to appendix A. You can 
use the cursor keys to scroll trough the monitor. When you're using the 
monitor you can alternate between the ASCII and hexadecimal dump by pressing 
[TAB]. 

In the hexadecimal layout you can alter the value of the currently selected 
address by pressing one of the number keys [0] to [9] and the [A]-[F] keys. 
The pressed key will be displayed and the program will wait for the rest of 
the number to be entered. At this point you can press [ESC] if you didn't 
want to change the value. In this case the old value will be restored. If you 
have entered just one key so far and press the cursor keys then the value 
stored in the address will be changed with the just pressed figure and 
afterwards the cursor movement will be processed. If you entered a second 
digit the new value will be stored and the cursor will continue to the next 
address.

In the ASCII layout you can change the current character be pressing any key. 
The value will be altered to the key value you've pressed and the cursor will 
automatically move to the next position. If you use the [BS] key then the 
current address will be set to zero and the cursor will be moved to the 
previous address.

By pressing the [SELECT] key you can rapidly switch between the monitor and 
debugger, making it possible to quickly adapt values or keep track of larger 
memory blocks when debugging. For the other available shortcuts, please have 
a look at appendix A.


4.2 The monitor menus

The menu bar in the monitor contains 3 different menus:

        System :        see chapter 2.3
        Configuration : see chapter 4.2.1
        Options :       see chapter 4.2.2


4.2.1 Configuration menu

A number of settings which are applicable to the monitor can be set in this 
menu, which you can reach by pressing [F2].

* ADDRESS:

Use this option to set the current address which you'ld like to monitor. When 
selected a popup window appears so you can enter an address. This address 
can be explicit like #F3DE or 32894 but you can also use labels or calculate 
an address on the fly like label+4*7. You can leave this window by pressing 
[ESC] if you didn't want to change the address.

* CPU:

If you're running Konpass on a Turbo-R you can use this option to switch 
between CPU mode: Z80, R800 ROM and R800 DRAM mode. Of course only Z80 mode 
is present on non-Turbo-R computers.

* CHAINING:

It is possible to 'chain' the monitoraddress to some of the addresses used in 
the debugger. In that case the monitoraddress and the specific 
debuggeraddress will be kept equal.

* MAIN INSTALL:

Use this to change Konpass global settings. For more info refer to chapter 10.


4.2.2 Options Menu

In this menu, which you can reach by pressing [F3], are methods available to 
search and alter memory content.

* SEARCH:

This option always you to search the visible memory for sequences of bytes. A 
window appears so you can enter a start and ending address for the search. As 
third you are asked for the byte sequence to search for. Here a few examples 
how to enter some specific search criteria.

"TEST"  ; search  'T','E','S','T'
"ZOEK",0,label  ; search 'Z','O','E','K',0,label

When you press enter there are two possible effects:

- You return to the monitor and the address is changed to the first occurrence 
of the given byte sequence.
- You return to the monitor and the message "String not found !" is displayed 
indicating that the given sequence isn't found in the indicated memory block.

* SEARCH NEXT:

Search for the next occurrence of the previous searched for byte sequence. 
Of course if you got the error "String not found !" then this option hasn't 
got any effect.

* FILL:

This option gives you the opportunity to fill a block of memory with a given 
value. Again a window will appear so that you can enter the beginning and 
ending of the region in memory. Next you'll have to enter the value that 
should be used to fill the memory.

If this value exceeds 255 then this memory will automatically be filled with 
16 bit values. If you enter a number that's smaller or equal to 255 then 
you will be explicitly asked if this value should be treated as a 16 or 8 
bit value. When all values are entered the filling will immediately take 
place.

You can press [ESC] at any time to leave this option.

* COPY:

This is, like the name suggest, for copying a block of memory to another 
address. First you'll be prompted to enter the beginning and the ending of 
the source. As third parameter you'll need to enter the destination address. 
You can press [ESC] at any time to leave this option.

* COMPARE:

This makes it possible to compare two chuncks of memory. Enter begin and end 
address of the first block; finally you are asked for the beginning of the 
second block, which shall be compared to the just defined first block.
If no differences are found you get back in the monitor without any message, 
otherwise the message "Not equal !" will be displayed and the monitor will be 
set to the address where the first difference is encountered.

* POKE:

Just like the BASIC command this option is used to change memorycontents at a 
specified address. Although this can be done by direct entering new values at 
the cursor position, this option has definitely some advantages.
If the value entered exceeds 255 then this value will be automatically 
treated as a 16 bit value. If you entered a number that's smaller or equal to 
255 then there will be explicitly asked if this value should be handled as a 
16 or 8 bit value.

This option has also the advantage that you can write bytes to specific 
memory locations while some other memory part can be watched. Useful for 
writing to the DOS2 ROM page selector address, SCC rompage selector 
addresses...

* PEEK:

Allows you to have a quick peek at an address without changing the 
monitor address. The contents of the address will be displayed both 8 and 16 
bit.

* PRINT:

Use this if you want to have a hardcopy of the memory dump. Again you enter 
begin and end of the desired chunck. Once this is done the block of memory 
will be printed using the same layout that appears on the screen. 


5. Debugger
-----------

After you have chosen the option Debugger from the system menu you will end 
up in the debugger. This debugger can also be used as a disassembler. 
This debugger allows you to have an easy and comfortable way of finding bugs 
in a program or just to monitor the program flow to get a better 
understanding of a program.


5.1 Debugger screen and controls

The monitor screens is made up by a status bar, a menu bar and the desktop. 
The menu bar has four different menus, respectively the SYSTEM menu, the 
CONFIGURATION menu, the OPTIONS menu and finally the STEP/TRACE menu.
Below the menu bar the desktop can be found, which consists of the debugger 
accompanied by a window displaying the CPU registers, a minimonitor with 
hexadecimal and ASCII dumps and a stack viewer.

* Minimonitor

In the lower region of the desktop there is a minimonitor displaying a hex 
dump and an ASCII dump. This minimonitor can be linked to the cursor or to 
the PC-register or it can be used to display a fixed address. This 
minimonitor is realtime updated.

* Stack viewer

The stack works according to the FILO principle (First In Last Out). This 
means that the value that is first placed on the stack will be the last to be 
lifted off the stack. The mnemonics PUSH and CALL put values onto the stack, 
the mnemonics POP and RET retrieve values from the stack.

The stack always uses 16-bit values. The stack viewer makes it possible to 
have an easy to access way to monitor stack changes. If a program gets stuck 
after a ret it's almost always an error in the stackvalues (probably a PUSH 
or POP that forces a wrong RETurn value). The stackviewer is realtime updated.

* Cursor and Program Counter Bar

This debugger uses independent cursor and PC-bar. The main advantage of this 
is that you can browse through the entire memory with the cursor without this 
having any influence on the program that's being debugged since the PC isn't 
changed by the browsing. Of course the possibility exists to assign the value 
of the cursor to the PC or vice versa.

* Safety

The debugger of Konpass is made with a lot of detail for security; great 
effort has gone into the separation of the debugger and the program to be 
debugged. All instructions are executed in the program's environment. This 
means: all registers (including SP), interrupt state (DI or EI) and memory 
slotselection are set up as displayed, followed by simulated execution of the 
instruction. In this way the program's stack and registers are separated from 
the debugger's stack and registers.

Make sure the SP register points to a safe(=unused) location before tracing 
any stack commands! Otherwise vital system information can be overwritten 
eventually resulting in a crash.

If you're going to safe-debug then it's good to know that ALL the different 
OUT instructions are diverted also, allowing to block certain ports. For 
example if you're debugging a program that directly handles the VDP and you'd 
allow this during debugging then the MSX could crash.

If you're debugging and a HALT instruction is encountered when the interrupts 
are disabled you'll receive a warning because under normal circumstances the 
MSX should completely block itself waiting for an interrupt that can never 
occur.

To separate Konpass and the debugged program even further, the memory 
management of a normal MSX is also diverted to own routines. This means that 
instructions who read/write port #A8, #FF, #FE, #FD, #FC or subslot registers 
#FFFF are handled by the memory management of Konpass. (Except for INIR, 
INDR, INI and IND)

For the subslot registers (address #FFFF) the following instructions are 
checked:

LD reg,(HL)
LD (HL),reg
LD (HL),value
LD A,(#FFFF)
LD (#FFFF),A

If a program uses a more exotic way of changing address #FFFF then Konpass 
won't be able to automatically divert the instruction. So the (new) 
memory selection will have to be done manually by the person who is debugging 
without execution of the instruction. For example a LD IX,#FFFE followed by 
LD (IX+1),C will not be detected by the debugger. Executing the LD (IX+1),C 
instruction will write to the REAL subslotregister and may cause the computer 
to crash.

It is not possible to alter the slot selection for page 3 and thus it is 
not possible to trace instructions in page 3 in another slot than the primary 
RAM slot currently selected. Nevertheless memory settings (port #A8 and #FFFF 
contents) for page 3 are well emulated. This will do for most debugging work.

* Controls

The debugger supports the mouse and most of the functions can be activated 
using shortcuts. For a list of the shortcuts we refer to appendix A. All
shortcuts that can be activated using a [CTRL] combination can also be 
activated without the [CTRL] key.

By pressing the [SELECT] key you can rapidly switch between the monitor and 
debugger, making it possible to quickly adapt values or keep track of larger 
memory blocks for easy debugging.

* The debugger menus

The menu bar of the debugger consists of five menus
        System:        see chapter 2.3
        Configuration: see chapter 5.2.1
        Options:       see chapter 5.2.2
        IO-list:       see chapter 5.2.3
        Step/trace:    see chapter 5.2.4


5.2.1 Configuration menu

Reachable by pressing [F2].

* CPU:

If you're running Konpass on a Turbo-R you can use this option to switch 
between CPU mode.

* MSX RST:

This option indicates if you want the RST displayed on screen as they are 
intended by the standard MSX-BIOS. This option is very useful when writing 
your own BIOS. For example, if this option is turned on then RST #30 is shown 
as follows:

        RST 30 DB 00;578A       F7008A57

If you turn the option off, the screen will display
        RST 30  F7
        NOP     00
        ADC A,D 8A
        LD D,A  57

* LINKING:

This allows you to bind the scrolling of the minimonitor to your actions. If 
this is turned off then the minimonitor doesn't respond to actions of the 
cursor or debugger.

If this option says 'cursor' then the minimonitor will change its address so 
that it displays the memory address that is indicated by the cursor. 
When displaying 'PC reg.' the minimonitor will respond to changes of the 
program counter and will display the according memory. If you manually force 
the minimonitor to a certain address then this option is automatically turned 
off.

* MAIN INSTALL:

Use this to change Konpass global settings. For more info refer to chapter 10.


5.2.2 Options menu

Reachable by pressing [F3].

* DISASSEMBLER ADDRESS:

Use this to change the address of the debugger. [ESC] cancels this option 
when selected.

* MONITOR ADDRESS:

Use this to change the address of the minimonitor. [ESC] cancels this option 
when selected. Linking of the minimonitor is turned off.

* GO:
Use this to start real execution of a program at a given address. [ESC] 
cancels this option when selected.

This starts the program and gives all control to the program, no checks are 
made when this option is invoked. Be very careful, when wrongly used your 
computer crashes! When debugging a program make sure you have saved your work 
before trying to execute it. If your program doesn't react as was planned or 
it changes memory banks etc then you can lose all source modifications made 
after your last save!

* REGISTERS:

Use this if you want to alter the registers. A selection bar will appear in
the register window allowing you to choose a register couple to change. 
Pressing space allows you to change the value of the registers. The value can 
be explicitly given, or can be a label or can be calculated on the fly. 
The flags and the DI/EI indication can also be selected but using the 
spacebar on them will only switch them to their alternate state. Register IR 
can't be modified since this doesn't make much sense. [ESC] ends this option.

* TEMPORARY:

This option stores the address of the cursor in the call buffer and brings 
the cursor to the address given as parameter for this option. By storing the 
current value of the cursor in this buffer you can return here using the 
option RETURN (see below). Use [ESC] to cancel if you changed your mind.

* RETURN:

Gets the last value stored with TEMPORARY back from the call buffer and 
returns the cursor to this position. The call buffer for this option uses the 
FILO principle so nested calls can be made.

Combination of this last two options allows you to efficiently look at a call 
routine without having to actually execute it or remember the cursor position 
manually so you can return there later.

* PRINT:

If you want to print a disassembled chunk of memory this is the option you 
were looking for. The requested parameters are beginning and ending of the 
block to disassemble. During this inputting you can press [ESC] to cancel.

* DIS=>SOURCEBUFFER:

Use this little option to disassemble some code and place the disassembled 
code in the current source buffer. Attention: THIS WILL DESTROY THE CURRENT 
CONTENT OF THE SOURCE BUFFER! 


5.2.3 IO-list menu

In this menu, which you can reach by pressing [F4], are two options to alter 
the IO-list. The IO-list can contain at most 17 ports which will be ignored 
during stepping/tracing of OUT instructions. (also OTIR,...) If for example 
you put the four ports #98 up until #9B in it, all direct VDP commands will 
be blocked and will be ignored. This option's main purpose is to avoid 
locking and screen-garbage.

Remarks:

-Port read instructions are ALWAYS performed in real. (Except for port 
#A8,#FC,#FD,#FE,#FF)
-It has no influence if you insert port #A8,#FC,#FD,#FE or #FF into the 
IO-list.

* INSERT IO:

If the list isn't full you can enter a new port to be ignored in the list. 
[ESC] cancels the operation.

* DELETE IO:

If the list isn't empty this option allows you to remove one of the ports in 
the list. When selected you can use the cursor to move up and down through the 
list. Using the [SPACEBAR] you indicate which item should be removed. By 
pressing [ESC] you leave this option.

Below these two options a dotted line separates the options from the 
current IO-list.


5.2.4 Step/trace menu

Reachable by pressing [F5] .

* SET BREAKPOINT:

This option makes it possible to add breakpoints to the breakpoint list of 
the debugger, so you can stop tracing at a given address. Once selected a 
window appears containing the current address of the cursor.

If the cursor address is already selected as a breakpoint then this address 
will be ignored and the window will not contain any value.

If the breakpoint list is already filled you'll receive an error message 
indicating so. You'll need to remove one or more breakpoints in that case if 
you need to insert other ones. The maximum number of breakpoints is 15.

* RESET BREAKPOINT:

Use this to remove old breakpoints from the breakpoint list. A window will 
appear asking for the address to be removed from the breakpoint list. If your 
current position is on top of a breakpoint than this address will be 
automatically filled out in the window. If the address isn't a breakpoint you 
will be notified of this, otherwise the breakpoint is simply removed from the 
list.

* EXECUTE TILL BP:

This will automatically trace a program until a breakpoint is encountered. An 
error will be produced if there are no breakpoints defined. You can stop the 
execution by pressing [ESC]. The screen is updated after a fixed number of 
instructions is executed. 

* VIEW BREAKPOINTS:

A list will appear containing all the defined breakpoints. You can select a 
breakpoint and press [ENTER] to delete it. This will bring up the window that 
is used for the RESET BREAKPOINT with the address of the selected breakpoint 
already filled out.

* SPECIAL TRACE:

This is a special variant of EXECUTE TILL BP. It will first place a 
breakpoint after the current instruction and then start the 
execute-till-breakpoint-routine. Useful for stepping subroutines in a safe 
way because the whole subroutine is traced. 

If you would do a real STEP on a call that modifies IO ports or change 
VDP/VRAM contents your MSX could crash.


5.3 Important keys

Most shortcuts for the debugger are explained in appendix A. Nevertheless 
there are five shortcuts that need your special attention.

[CTRL] + [S] or [S]

Pressing this shortcut will perform a so-called STEP-command. The instruction 
at the Program Counter is executed. Registercontents are modified 
accordingly.

[CTRL] + [T] or [T]

This shortcut executes the TRACE command. This is almost the same as the STEP 
instruction, but now the CALL instruction is not directly executed; the 
returnaddress is PUSHed onto the stack and the debugger jumps to the new 
address.

Executing a CALL as a single instruction is of course a lot faster but in such 
a case Konpass isn't capable of checking the instructions in the subroutine.
If this subroutine directly changes the memory banks, VDP registers or VRAM 
contents then your MSX may crash!

Therefore it's better to trace each instruction unless you are sure that 
nothing dangerous will happen in the subroutine. Since going through an 
entire subroutine can take some time the option SPECIAL TRACE is very useful 
for this purpose.

[CTRL] + [H] or [H]

This is an easy way to place the PC register at the same address as the 
cursor.

[CTRL] + [J] or [J]

This is the inverse of [H]. The cursor will be placed at the same address as 
the PC-register is indicating.

[CTRL] + [I] or [I]

This sets the SP register back to its initial value (when Konpass was entered 
from the MSX-DOS command prompt minus 512 bytes). In most cases this is a 
safe stackspace.


6. Disk
-------

The disk menu can be reached by selecting the option DISK from the SYSTEM 
menu. Most people will prefer to use the short-cut [CTRL] + [D].


6.1 Disk screen & controls

The disk menu replaces the entire desktop. At the top some important settings 
are displayed like the current source buffer (only if you came from the 
assembler), backup settings and the currently selected filetype.

Below there is a line is reserved to display the path and most of the desktop 
is used to display the directory contents. At the bottom the possible options 
are displayed respectively SAVE, LOAD, DIR, TYPE, MKDIR, KILL and FORMAT. At 
the right of these options the filename is displayed that will be used to 
perform these operations upon.

To enter a file name just start typing the name. If you are entering a name 
you can press [ESC] to undo the modifications, the old name will then 
reappear. 

Use the keys [CTRL] + [B] to change the backup settings. The possible values 
are 'off', 'asm' or 'asc'. The value 'asm' will have the effect that every 
time you want to overwrite an existing ASM file this will be backuped to 
using the same name but with the extension BAK. Previous backups of the same 
file will be lost. The value asc will do the same for ASCII files.

Use the keys [CTRL] + [T] to change the current file type which you want to 
handle. There are also keyboard shortcuts for direct selection of the new 
file type, see also chapters 6.2 and 6.3.

Use the keys [CTRL] + [1] until [4] to change the current source buffer. This 
option can be used when you entered the disk menu from the assembler. This is 
a very useful way to load or save multiple sources without the need to 
repeatedly switch to the assembler just to switch from one source buffer to 
another.

Each source does have its own name buffer, so there isn't any need to be 
concerned to accidentally overwrite a file because of forgetting to alter the 
name when you changed the source buffer. There are two separate sets of name 
buffers, one for Assembler files and another one for Ascii files.

Pressing [ESC] ends the disk menu and takes you back to the Konpass part from 
which you summoned the disk menu.

6.2 File types

Konpass gives you to the opportunity to operate on different kind of files. 
these type are:

Assembler files (only from within the assembler)
Ascii files     (only from within the assembler)
Binary files
Data files
Block files     (only from within the assembler)
Sector          (not really a file but nevertheless useful)

Apart from using the TYPE menu or pressing [CTRL] + [T], you can change the 
current file type via the following keyboard shortcuts:

CTRL + E: Set "Assembler" file type (only from within the assembler)
CTRL + I: Set "Ascii" file type (only from within the assembler)
CTRL + D: Set "Data" file type
CTRL + Y: Set "Binary" file type
CTRL + K: Set "Block" file type (only from within the assembler)
CTRL + O: Set "Sector" type
CTRL + X: Assemble (only from within "Assemble to disk/REL/TSR")

Notice the fact that if the disk menu is invoked from within the monitor or 
debugger you only have access to 3 of the 6 possibilities.

* ASSEMBLER FILES

One of the most nice things in Konpass is its ability to quickly load and 
save sources. This is possible by using this new type of file, the assembler 
file.

These files contain the total of all the necessary structures that Konpass 
uses to store sources in memory.

Since this is a memory dump of the source and data buffers no conversion is 
needed when sources are saved or loaded this way. Of course since all this 
extra info is saved the files will usually be bigger then the same source 
saved in ASCII but the gain of time makes it up.

* ASCII FILES

Of course Konpass would be quite useless for most people if the old trusted 
ASCII file couldn't be read (and saved of course). This option, in 
combination with the AUTO-ALIGN, gives you also the possibility to read and 
write normal textfiles in the editor. It can be very useful to have a nice 
reference online in an other source buffer like the BIOS overview text.

* BINARY FILES

To store and retrieve chunks of memory Konpass supports the BASIC bload 
format. These files contain a seven bytes header (db FEh, dw start, dw end, 
dw begin_execution) followed by the data itself. When saving you will be 
prompted to enter the addresses needed for the header. When loading this 
address will determine the destination address of the block in memory.

* DATA FILES

These are raw data files, with no header. Therefore when loading such a block 
of bytes you will be asked where the file must be placed in memory. The 
ending address for loading is also asked, this will automatically contain the 
address where the last byte should be placed if the entire file is read. By 
changing this address you can stop reading before the end of the file is 
read.

The begin and end address will be asked when saving and the memory will 
simply be dumped in a file. 

* BLOCK FILES

These are just simple ASCII files. If you've chosen a block in the 
assembler/editor then this block can be saved as an ASCII file. When reading 
a block this piece of text will be inserted at the current line in the 
current buffer. This block will be selected when you return to the assembler.

* SECTORS

Konpass is capable of directly working with sectors (very nice if you want to 
alter the boot record of the disk for example). THIS IS OF COURSE VERY 
DANGEROUS! By typing a wrong sector number or by mistake overwriting a wrong 
disk you can permanently lose vital data on the disk.

Be very very cautious. For safety reasons confirmation will be asked before 
actually writing sectors. In previous versions of Konpass you wouldn't be 
allowed to write sectors to a hard disk or another non-floppy media (any 
media with a media id lower than F8h is considered non-floppy), this 
restriction has been removed but a "Not a floppy disk !" warning message 
will be shown for these media.

If you run Nextor you'll be able to read and write sectors from/to any media, 
regardless of the contained filesystem and even when there's no filesystem 
at all. Note however that currently access is limited to the first 32MB of 
the device, regardless of its size.

You will be asked for the source address, the first sector on disk and the 
number of sectors when saving. The same data will be asked when trying to 
read.


6.3 Disk menu

The disk menu contains the options SAVE, LOAD, DIR, TYPE, MKDIR, KILL, FORMAT. 

* SAVE

Use this to save from a source buffer or memory to a file or to disk sectors 
(depending on the selected file type). If you keep pressed CTRL while 
triggering the execution of this option the disk menu will close after the 
operation finishes successfully (but not if there's an error).

You can use the keyboard shortcut [CTRL] + [S] to trigger this action as well 
(in this case the disk menu will always close on success).

* LOAD

Use this to load from a file or from sectors to the a source buffer or to 
memory (depending on the selected file type). If you keep pressed CTRL while 
triggering the execution of this option the disk menu will close after the 
operation finishes successfully (but not if there's an error).

You can use the keyboard shortcut [CTRL] + [L] to trigger this action as well 
(in this case the disk menu will always close on success).

* DIR

This is the default option when you enter the disk menu, this should prevent 
accidentally destroying data.

If you choose this option you can enter a path in the path line. When this is 
done and the pathname is valid then the contents of this directory is 
displayed. Use the cursor keys and space to choose a file in the list. If a 
name is surrounded by brackets then this is a directory name.

Choosing a directory will result in the displaying its contents and the 
modification of the pathname. If a directory has too many entries to display 
you will be asked if you want to continue to the other names not on screen.
If you have chosen a name this name will be displayed in the name selection 
and the selection bar will return to the menu options.

If you type a directory name in the path line, keeping pressed CTRL while 
confirming the path will result in the directory being listed instead of 
being entered. Also, while navigating the directory entries, keeping pressed 
CTRL while a directory is selected will select the directory as if it was 
a file, instead of entering it (except for ".." entries). This may be useful 
if you want to delete the directory using the KILL option.

* TYPE

This has the same effect as pressing [CTRL]+[T]. The different filetypes are 
handled in chapter 6.2. Remember the difference between the assembler and the 
monitor/debugger menu! Also remember that there are direct keyboard shortcuts 
for file type selection, see section 6.2.

* MKDIR

This makes a new directory in the current subdirectory. The current filename 
is used as name for the new directory. This works only with MSX-DOS2 of
course.

* KILL

This option will first ask for confirmation before actually destroying the 
file. In MSX-DOS 2 it can be used to delete a directory too, provided that 
the directory is empty.

* FORMAT

The type of formatting will be asked and the formatting will begin 
immediately when the choice is made. NO FURTHER CONFIRMATION IS ASKED! Be 
sure you have put the right disk in the diskdrive. Also the label buffer will 
be erased for this action so after a format the label information built up 
during assembling is gone.

Some disk controllers allow formatting but don't offer a format type choice 
(since there's only one format type), in this case a simple "Are you sure?" 
confirmation message will be shown before the formatting process begins.


7. Memory
---------

Some of the most powerful features of Konpass is the ability to configure 
your memory. Especially when you make use of a memory manager like DOS2 or 
MemMan, because memory used by Konpass will pe protected by these managers.
If you don't use a memory manager, memory used by Konpass can be corrupted by 
other programs.

If Konpass is launched for the first time, Konpass will automatically 
configure your memory. Changes you may want to make can be saved by 
performing a SAVE CONFIGURATION (see chapter 10).

Each block is identified by its location in the computer.
Examples:
3-2 7  :this block is situated in primary slot 3, subslot 2, mappersegment 7
 1  20 :this block is situated in Primary slot 1, mappersegment 20
---    :no memory selected for this purpose

Note the following:
3-2 7   <-- closest neighbour
 ---    <-- this block can be changed because it is not isolated
 ---    <-- this block can't be changed because it is isolated

Press [SPACE] to change a block. Use cursors to choose a new block or to 
disable a block. Only unused memoryblocks can be selected. Of course you 
can't disable the Konpass program blocks and the first label buffer block.

Note the following:
The first label buffer block and the second Konpass program block should be 
situated in the primary mapper.

On the right side of the Konpass program blocks you can select the working 
memory. This working memory is:

-Used as target memory for assembling
-Shown in the Monitor
-Shown in the Debugger

You can alter these settings for pages 0, 1 and 2. Not for page 3 because the 
system variables kept in this page should be reachable at any time.

Make sure you don't select a block that is in use by Konpass. Konpass will 
likely crash if it is (partially) overwritten.

Remark: if you have lots of memory (>6MB) it is possible that not all memory 
can be paged in due to current limitations of Konpass.


8. Calculator
-------------

When you use the SYSTEM menu or the shortcut [CTRL] + [C] you will see the 
calculator appear on your screen.

The calculator consists of a small frame, which can be moved up- and 
downwards using the cursors. This is useful to look at the information hidden 
'behind' the calculator.

You can leave the calculator by pressing [ESC].

Konpass is equipped with a very powerful calculator. The next enumeration 
should clearly state this.

* The calculator uses the mathematical priority of operations (raise to
  the n-th power, multiply, divide, add and subtract) and brackets. There
  is no limitation to the number of brackets used in an expression making
  for example ((6*(76-4)/23+(12-45))*7) a valid expression.
* The minus sign can be used as many times as one wishes.
  This makes ---5 equal to -5.
* The logical operators AND, OR and XOR and the MOD operator.
* You can use the result of the previous made calculation in the current
  expression by using the $-sign.
* It is possible to place spaces between the digits of the same number,
  making % 1100  00  11 a correct number while keeping the readability high.
* The calculator can use the labels in the label buffer. If your program uses
  labels as START, ENDPROG, DATA, ... then after compilation you can use
  an expression as : (DATA - START) / 1024 +ENDPROG for example.

When an expression is calculated the result is shown as a 8/16 bit 
hexadecimal number, a 8/16 bit binary number, as a regular decimal number and 
as one/two character(s). If you entered an error in the expression you will 
get a chance to correct it and you can try again. If all went fine the 
command line will be empty and you can enter the next expression.


9. Slot view

------------
This option will show your hardware configuration.

The following things are displayed:

BIOS:   This is the MSX-BIOS ROM (always in primary slot 0, page 0)
BASIC:  This is the MSX-BASIC ROM (always in primary slot 0, page 1)
ROM:    This page contains ROM
D-rom:x This page contains a diskrom with x drives connected to it
OPLL:   This page contains a MSX-MUSIC ROM (FM-PAC)
AUDIO:  This page contains a Philips Music Module ROM (MSX-AUDIO)
RAM:    A memory mapper or fixed memory module is situated here
        Also the capacity is mentioned

You can leave Slot view by pressing [ESC].

Remark: possible ROM pages or fixed RAM pages in page 3 are not shown.


10. Main config
---------------

This menu is used to change and save the current settings of Konpass.
Use [SPACE] to select the desired parameter.

* HEX-ID:

Use this option to set your favourite hexadecimal ID. Konpass uses the 
following IDs by default:

in front: # and &H , example: #FD9F &HFD9F
behind:   H        , example: FD9FH

Use cursors to select the desired position and enter your ID bytes if you 
want to.

* BIN-ID:
Use this option to set your favourite binary ID.

in front: % and &B , example: %1010 &B1010
behind:   B        , example: 1010B

Use cursors to select the desired position and enter your ID bytes if you 
want to.

Note: the following characters are not allowed for ID use:
"'()*+,-./0123456789:;<=>

* PRINTERLINE:

This data is sent to the printer before the actual data. An ESC code should 
be entered as a ^.

* MOUSE:

Use this option to switch mousecontrol on or off. If no mouse is connected to 
the computer, we recommend to disable mousecontrol. Mousecontrol is disabled 
by default.

* ROUNDED CORNERS:

Use this option to choose whether user interface boxes should display
rounded corners or square corners. Just try both options and stick to the one 
that you find more visually pleasant.

* INITIAL FILE TYPE:

Use this option to choose which will be the file type selected when you first
go to the disk menu from the assembler after starting Konpass. You can choose
between Asm and Ascii.

* COLOR 1-4:

You can change Konpass' colours with this option. This is done by changing 
the Red, Green and Blue values of the palette.

* SAVE CONFIGURATION:

VERY USEFUL OPTION!
This option will save your current Konpass configuration:

-Mouse, printer line, ...
-Memory configuration
-Editor parameters for each source buffer: Label lenght, Ret ins, Autoalign
-Backup status of disk menu

Configuration will be saved to a KONPASS.CFG file in the same drive/directory 
of the KONPASS.COM and KONPASS.DAT files. In previous versions of Konpass 
(1.2.09 and older) configuration was saved into the KONPASS.COM file itself.


11. Macros
----------

Macros are probably the most used assembler directives ever. They give the 
possibility to place short pieces of often used code under a self defined 
commandname, allowing you to use this home-made command instead of retyping 
all the commands every single time.

The assembler will automatically expand these commands to the original code. 
Besides the fact of saving time used for retyping al the commands one after 
another macros also aid in maintaining the readability of your code. Of 
course you can pass parameters to your little routines which will be inserted 
in the macro during the assembling.

Konpass also supports recursive macros, meaning that one macro can use 
another (or its own) macro inside it's definition.

Three assembler directives are preserved for usage with macro's.

* MACRO

Syntax : MACRO [@param1, @param2, @param3]

This directive is used to open a macro definition. You can pass some 
parameters which name has to begin with an @, to differentiate them of 
regular labels. Once defined this way you can use this macro-labels inside of 
your macro definition, allowing you to use this macro for different purposes. 
Inside a macro you can place certain conditions on the parameters by use of 
conditional assembling.

You can't open a macro definition inside another macro definition.

* ENDM

syntax : ENDM

Using this directive you end the current macro definition. The code entered 
between the MACRO and ENDM doesn't get assembled on the spot, instead every 
reference to the macro name later will be replaced by this code during 
assembling.

* DEFL

syntax :   label: DEFL value

This assembler directive does the same thing as the EQU directive, you use it 
to assign a value to a label. This directive can only be used inside a macro.

Within a macro you can use also the label-ending "@sym" or "@SYM". These four 
signs in a label will be translated to a four digit number. This number will 
automatically be raised every time a macro is expanded. When first invoked 
this will be 0000, the second time a macro is expanded this will be 0001 etc.
This has as advantage that a label can be used in macros that are more than 
once expanded without that this results in errors. If not this would result 
in a redefinition of the same label. Take a look at the examples for more 
clarity.

When a macro is invoked the passed parameters are placed literally in the 
macro itself. This means that the parameters itself are replaced in the 
source of the macro before the compilation of the instruction takes place. 
This allows you to pass registers, labels, texts etc. as parameters for the 
internal macro-code.

Example 1:

bc_de:  macro @part1,@part2
        ld bc,@part1
        ld de,@part2
        endm

        ...              ;program 
        bc_de 567,#babe  ;macro is used in program
        ...              ;program

In this simple example the registers BC en DE will be filled with the 
parameters passed to macro bc_de. Let's assume you have two parameters the 
numbers 567 and #babe.

When assembling bc_de 567,#babe the assembler will generate the following 
code:
        ld bc,567
        ld de,#babe

Assume you want to load bc with the value at (#FBB1) then you pass as 
parameters

        bc_de (#FBB1),#babe

The compiler will replace the @part1 and @part2 and generate code for

        ld bc,(#FBB1)
        ld de,#babe

Example 2:

PRINT:  macro @p1
        push hl
        ld hl,m@sym
        call mout       ; a printing routine
        pop hl
        jr l@sym
m@sym:  db @p1,0
l@sym:
        endm

This generates a printing routine every time the macro PRINT is encountered. 
For example:

        PRINT "Hello World :-)"
        PRINT "This is a test line"

By using the @sym construction it is possible to invoke the macro more than 
once. The first PRINT will be assembled with the @sym replaced by 0000. the 
next PRINT invocation the @sym will be replaced by 0001.

If we left out this @sym from let's say the label m@sym then when translating 
the code the first time (PRINT "Hello World") we would have generated a label 
'm '. The second time (PRINT "This is a test line") the assembler would find 
again a definition for a label m.

Since the label m was already declared the first time this would give an 
error. By placing the @sym code after the label this is avoided. We now have 
two different labels (m0000 and m0001 to be exactly).

Example 3:

bdos:   macro @fun,@fcb
        if "@fcb">""
        ld de,@fcb
        endif
        ld c,@fun
        call #0005
        endm

This is a more advanced macro. The registerpair DE is only loaded with the 
value @fcb if this parameter is declared by the invocation. If you should 
call this macro with only one parameter than the ld de,@fcb isn't assembled 
and register de will not be modified by this macro.

Example 4:

fact:   macro @result,@n
        if @n=1
@result defl 1
        else
        fact t@sym,@n-1
@result defl t@sym*@n
        endif
        endm

This is a more difficult macro which uses recursion. In this examples you can 
see how you can define and use internal labels (if they don't exists some 
where else) and assign a value to them. This macro should be called with a 
label as parameter and a number. for example:

fact label,5 ; this calculates the factorial of 5 and places the result in 
label.


12. Conditional assembly
------------------------

With conditional assembly you're able to select which part(s) of your source 
should be assembled. You are allowed to use 16 nested IF statements.

        IF / COND
        Syntax: IF / COND parameter [condition parameter]

Use this to open a condition: If the expression behind IF (or COND) is true 
(not equal to zero), the assembling will continue as normal. If it is false, 
all mnemonics between the IF statement and the next ENDIF statement are not 
assembled.

Examples:

IF 1               ;true (not equal to zero)
IF 3<=2            ;false
IF "Konpass">"GPS" ;false (stringsize)
IF "ABC">"AAA"     ;true (ASCII alphabetical)

        ELSE
        Syntax: ELSE

Use this option to switch assembling on if it was turned off. Assembly is 
turned off if it was on.

        ENDIF / ENDC
        Syntax: ENDIF / ENDC

Use this to turn assembly on. Of course only when you've use IF.

Example 1:

label1  equ     1

        if      label1=1
        db      "Konpass",0
        else
        db      "Test",0
        endif

Only "Konpass" will be assembled.

Example 2:

        if      "Test">"test"
                if 1=2
                defs    50    ;this command is not assembled
                endif
        defs    100     ;this command is assembled
        endif


13. Terminate & Stay Resident programs
--------------------------------------

These programs, usually abbreviated to TSR's, are designed to work as a 
background task. Some can be activated by hotkeys, others intercept hooks to 
be activated. These programs can only be used when running MemMan 2.4.
This Memory Manager does all the necessary memory allocation and hook 
maintenance for all the different TSR's and other MemMan-enabled programs so 
that we don't have any trouble with programs who, involuntarily, destroy each 
others address space and therefore make your MSX crash. MemMan 2.4 can 
be found on the Konpass disk (in the Commpass 1.2.09 repository, see 
section 1.1).

For more information about TSRs you should get the TSR development kit made 
by the MST.

Previously the only method to make a TSR was to compile the source to a 
Relocatable File (see chapter 14) which could only be done with gen80 from 
the DOS command line and further be linked with a specially by MST written 
linker to created the .TSR file. This is definitely a very time consuming and 
long-winded method. For this reason Konpass has built-in TSR compiling. To 
make this possible an extra directive had to be built, namingly:

* TSRHOOKS

This command has to be used before you define the hooks and accompanying 
labels at the end of the source (See the TSR framework in the TSR development 
kit). Afterwards you can compile your source to a TSR, this is a three-pass 
assembling. The compiled TSR can be loaded from DOS using the TL program. If 
the TSR doesn't function properly you can return to Konpass using the Konpass 
hotkey and adapt the source. This ensures an ideal working environment for 
TSR development.

Example:
        code
        .
        .
        .
        code

        TSRHOOKS
hooks:
        defw ...,...,...,...
        end


14. Relocatable files
---------------------

In the prehistoric times of computerp rogramming, CPU time was an awful 
expensive item. To make small changes in a 'large' program and recompile the 
entire source was something you'd better avoided. Beside that there was also 
the matter of multiple users using the same machine at the same time and the 
dangers that programs in the memory would trespassing each others memory 
space. For this reason the principle of small, quick to compile, modules 
raised its head.

The principal is thus to use different little sources, which by means of an 
assembler could be compiled and afterwards could be linked to each other and 
be placed anywhere in the main-memory. The big advantage was that now a small 
change in one or more small modules would cost less time to compile. The 
linking itself is relatively fast, so that the total time was decreased 
considerably. There was however a drawback to this method. When using labels 
and routines from an other module their (relative) address isn't known by the 
compiler since it isn't aware of the target address or the order in linking. 
To solve this problem the Relocatable Files were designed. These type of 
files consist of a bitstream containing all unknown addresses in the form of 
offset to different counterregisters. The linkerprogram is now able to 
calculate the absolute addresses since he is familiar to the linking order of 
the project. For more technical info about the Relocatable files we advise 
you to read the articles once published by MCCM.

To make the development of relocatable files possible some extra assembler 
directives were added, making it possible to control the byte flow in the 
final program

CSEG / DSEG / ASEG
Usage : CSEG / DSEG / ASEG

Assembling to relocatable files makes it possible to use three different 
counters. These are known as the code-segment (CSEG), the data-segment (DSEG) 
en the absolute-segment (ASEG). These segments are joined during linking, 
therefore enabling clustering of data and code blocks. When you start 
assembling, the code segment is automatically turned on. By using one of the 
3 commands you can indicate in which block the next code has to be placed.

PUBLIC / EXTERN
Usage : PUBLIC / EXTERN label, label, ..., label

By using the directive PUBLIC you declare labels in the current module known 
to the other modules, thus indicating that this label can be used by other 
modules. If a module want to use a label declared in an other module it has 
to indicate this by declaring that label with EXTRN. Instead of using the 
PUBLIC directive you can achieve the same effect by stating two doublepoints 
after the labelname. So 'label::' is functional equivalent to 'PUBLIC label'.

.PHASE
Usage : .PHASE address

Use this directive to create a temporary absolute segment. The program 
counter will be assigned the value 'address' and all the labels between this 
directive and the .DEPHASE directive will be placed upon this address or 
higher. This option is extremely useful if you want to replace a part of your 
program to an absolute address. Just place the desired block between the 
.PHASE / .DEPHASE directives, making the code to be compiled to the desired 
target address.

.DEPHASE
Usage : .DEPHASE

Using .DEPHASE restores the program counter to the old value and segment.


Appendix A: Shortcuts
*********************

If you are a frequent Konpass user you will certainly appreciate the 
shortcuts, these are thousands times faster than going through the regular 
select-menu-select-option method.


General shortcuts
-----------------

Japanese NO     Z80
Japanese YES    R800-ROM
CTRL + C        Calculator
CTRL + D        To disk menu
CTRL + Q        Quit the program
SHIFT + ESC     Exit to shell / resume Konpass


Assembler shortcuts
-------------------

CTRL + A        Assemble source to memory
CTRL + B        Show labels
CTRL + E        End of block
CTRL + G        Go to memory location (Run program)
CTRL + I        Show registers
CTRL + J        Jump to line in current source buffer
CTRL + K        Copy block to current line and buffer
CTRL + L        Copy the definition label from the block to current position
CTRL + N        Continue the search
CTRL + P        Print the currently selected block
CTRL + R        Show error list
CTRL + S        Set the beginning of the block
CTRL + T        Reset block
CTRL + V        Move block to current line and buffer
CTRL + W        Delete block
CTRL + Y        Assemble to disk
CTRL + Z        Search/replace text

CTRL + 1        Select source buffer 1
CTRL + 2        Select source buffer 2
CTRL + 3        Select source buffer 3
CTRL + 4        Select source buffer 4

CTRL + 5        Select PAL mode (50 Hz)
CTRL + 6        Select NTSC mode (60 Hz)

CTRL + F1       Store current position underneath the F1 key
CTRL + F2       Store current position underneath the F2 key
CTRL + F3       Store current position underneath the F3 key
CTRL + F4       Store current position underneath the F4 key
CTRL + F5       Store current position underneath the F5 key

SHIFT + F1      Get position stored with CTRL F1 and jump to that line
SHIFT + F2      Get position stored with CTRL F2 and jump to that line
SHIFT + F3      Get position stored with CTRL F3 and jump to that line
SHIFT + F4      Get position stored with CTRL F4 and jump to that line
SHIFT + F5      Get position stored with CTRL F5 and jump to that line

CTRL + INS      Insert a line
SHIFT + INS     Insert 10 lines
CTRL + DEL      Remove a line
SHIFT + DEL     Remove until end of line
HOME            Jump to beginning / ending of the current source buffer.
GRAPH + cursors Change : Uppercase >< lowercase

CTRL + up       Scroll up one screen
CTRL + down     Scroll down one screen
CTRL + right    To the beginning of the next word
CTRL + left     To the end of the previous word
SHIFT + up      Scroll up one hundred lines
SHIFT + down    Scroll down one hundred lines
SHIFT + right   To the right of the last character of the line
SHIFT + left    To the first position of the line

STOP            Go to the Monitor
SELECT          Go to the Debugger


Monitor shortcuts
-----------------

CTRL + A        Set current address
CTRL + E        'PEEK' an address
CTRL + F        Fill memory with given value
CTRL + K        Copy memory block 
CTRL + N        Continue the search
CTRL + O        'POKE' a value into an address
CTRL + P        Print a block of memory
CTRL + R        Compare memory blocks
CTRL + X        Toggle Chaining mode
CTRL + Z        Search

CTRL + up       Scroll up one screen
CTRL + down     Scroll down one screen

STOP            Go to the Debugger
SELECT          Go to the Debugger


Debugger shortcuts
------------------

Useful to adjust the disassembly startaddress:
CTRL + up       Scrolls back exactly 1 byte
CTRL + down     Scrolls forward exactly 1 byte

For the following shortcuts in the debugger you don't need to use the CTRL 
key, just the key will do.

CTRL + A        Set address
CTRL + B        Set breakpoint
CTRL + E        Execute until breakpoint
CTRL + G        Go (execute at given address)
CTRL + H        Puts the program counter onto the current cursor address
CTRL + I        Sets the SP register back to its initial value
CTRL + J        Puts the cursor address onto the current program counter
CTRL + L        Toggle Linking mode of the minimonitor
CTRL + O        Store current address and go to another one TEMPORARYly
CTRL + P        Change current slotselection
CTRL + R        Change Registers
CTRL + S        Step
CTRL + T        Trace
CTRL + U        Address stored with TEMPORARY gets 'popped'
CTRL + V        View breakpoints
CTRL + W        Erase breakpoint
CTRL + Y        Special trace

STOP            Go to the Assembler
SELECT          Go to the Monitor

SHIFT + up      Jumps back aprox. 200 bytes
SHIFT + down    Jumps forward aprox. 200 bytes

Please note that:

- STOP cycles between assembler, monitor and debugger.
- SELECT toggles between monitor and debugger (and switches from assembler to debugger).


Registers editor shortcuts
--------------------------

While the registers editor is open in the assembler or in the debugger, 
the following shortcuts are available:

A        Edit AF
B        Edit BC
D        Edit DE
H        Edit HL
X        Edit IX
Y        Edit IY
S        Edit SP
P        Edit PC (in debugger only)
R        Edit IR (in debugger only)
I        Toggle DI/EI
Z        Toggle Z/NZ
C        Toggle C/NC
N        Toggle N:1/N:0
O        Toggle PE/PO
G        Toggle H:0/H:1
M        Toggle P/M

Also:

SHIFT + A    Edit AF'
SHIFT + B    Edit BC'
SHIFT + D    Edit DE'
SHIFT + H    Edit HL'


Appendix B: Error messages
**************************

Here's a list of the messages you may encounter when using Konpass


Editor messages
---------------

        Databuffer to small....
The program is unable to load or edit a source because your data buffer isn't 
big enough. You are able to change this in the memory-menu (chapter 7).

        Destination in block !
You are trying to copy or move a block while the cursor (the target line) is 
in the block itself.

        No block selected !
You attempted to execute a block-command when you don't have a block 
selected.

        Printer not ready !
Your printer isn't online when you tried to print something.

        Sourcebuffer to small....
The program is unable to load or edit a source because your source buffer 
isn't big enough. You are able to change this in the memory-menu (chapter 7).

        Text not found !
The search function couldn't locate (any other) occurrence of the wanted text 
in the current buffer.


Assembler errors
----------------
        Bad instruction
Konpass didn't recognize the given command.

        Bad mnemonic
The entered registers, labels, values, etc. weren't recognized by Konpass.

        Division by zero
You tried to divide a (label representing a) number by zero.

        Illegal symbol in label
You are using an unauthorised symbol in a label.

        Label not defined
You are using a labelname which isn't defined although it should be at this 
point during assembling.

        Label too long
You have used a label name which exceeds the length of the maximum label 
length which is set using the CONFIGURATION menu or the assembler directive 
.LABEL.

        Labelbuffer too small.
During assembling the label buffer encountered an overflow. You can change 
the size of this buffer in the memory menu (see chapter 7).

        Macro already opened
You issued a MACRO command while you're already inside a MACRO definition.

        Macro not definied
You are using a MACRO command without naming it properly.

        Macro not opened
You're trying to close a macro definition with the ENDM command but you 
haven't opened any macro definition.

        Macro used as label
You are trying to use a defined macro name as a label, this is forbidden.

        Missing ")"
You entered an expression and forgot one or more closing brackets which 
leaves the expression open.

        Number out of range
The number you are using exceeds the maximum value allowed for this 
operation, ex. LD A,300

        Offset out of range
The target address for the relative offset cannot be reached.

        Phase still active
You're trying to use ORG / CSEG /DSEG / ASEG commands while you're still in a 
phase-mode.

        Public not found
The entered public label names don't appear in the current module. 

        Redefined label
The labelname you try to define is already defined elsewhere.

        Relocateable instruction
You are using a relocatable instruction and you aren't assembling to a 
relocateable file.

        Too many if's
You have more nested IF's than the allowed maximum of sixteen.


Monitor errors
--------------
        Not equal !
The two memory areas you are comparing aren't equal.

        Printer not ready !
You tried to print a memory dump but the printer seems to be off line.

        String not found !
The entered search string couldn't be found in the selected memory chunk.


Debugger errors
---------------
        Breakpoint-memory filled !
The memory allocated for breakpoint definitions is full.

        Call-buffer already empty !
You tried to retrieve an address from the call buffer which is already empty.

        Call-buffer already filled !
You tried to put an new address in the call buffer but there aren't any 
entries left.

        Printer not ready !
You tried to print a memory dump but the printer seems to be off line.

        There are no breakpoints to delete !
The breakpoint list is already completely empty.

        There is no breakpoint at that address !
You are trying to delete a breakpoint but there isn't a breakpoint defined at 
that address.

        This address is already defined as a breakpoint !
The address you gave already contained a breakpoint.

        You haven't defined any breakpoints !
You try to execute-until-breakpoint, but there aren't any breakpoints set.


Disk errors
-----------
        Disk I/O error !
A part of the disk can't be read or written.

        Disk offline !
There is no disk in the drive or the disk isn't formatted.

        File not found
The given file and/or pathname can't be found.

        No assembler file
You try to open a file as an assemblerfile but the file doesn't seem to be of 
the ASM type.

No binary file You try to open a file as a binaryfile but the file doesn't 
seem to be of the BIN type.

        No diskdrive !
You try to save a sector on a hard drive. This operation isn't allowed by 
Konpass.

        Write error !
During writing an error occurred. Try again using another disk (maybe your 
disk is full ?)

        Write protected !
The disk on which you tried to save is write-protected.

Note: in MSX-DOS 2 you may get other more detailed errors, for example trying 
to create a directory when a file with the same name already exists will 
result in a "File exists !" error.


Appendix C: Reserved words
**************************

Here's a list of the reserved words in the assembler. These are used during 
compilation and aren't allowed to be used as labels, macros or similar.

Instructions
------------
ADC     CPI     EXX     JP      NEG     PUSH    RLD     SET
ADD     CPIR    HALT    JR      NOP     RES     RR      SLA
AND     CPL     IM      LD      OR      RET     RRA     SLL
BIT     DAA     IN      LDD     OTDR    RETI    RRC     SRA
CALL    DEC     INC     LDDR    OTIR    RETN    RRCA    SRL
CCF     DI      IND     LDI     OUT     RL      RRD     SUB
CP      DJNZ    INDR    LDIR    OUTD    RLA     RST     XOR
CPD     EI      INI     MULUB   OUTI    RLC     SBF
CPDR    EX      INIR    MULUW   POP     RLCA    SCF


Operands
--------
A       H       AF      IXH     C       PE
B       I       BC      IXL     M       PO
C       L       DE      IY      NC      Z
D       R       HL      IYH     NZ
E       SP      IX      IYL     P


Assembler directives
--------------------
ASEG    DEFW/DW INCLUDE
BREAKP  END     .LABEL
COND    ENDC    MACRO
CSEG    ENDIF   ORG
DEFB/DB ENDM    PHASE
DEFC/DC EQU     PUBLIC
DEFM/DM EXTRN   TSRHOOKS
DEFL    IF      UPPER
